A woman...
doing you know this book about this man's man so to speak a boy's book you mean as my husband always called it it's so nice that you've written a boy's book um 65 different reasons look i mean different reasons in the beginning from in the end um you know the real genesis was rereading windstand and stars and realizing a really fine piece of writing i mean five pieces of writing
and that we didn't know anything about Sandex.
So it was like this, you know, J.M.
Barrie or Agatha Christie kind of figure where we still read the work, but they're related a little about the writer.
And then realizing that in terms of a biography,
filled with contradictions.
And that was what fascinates me in general, I suppose, in a book and in a life.
And that's what really fascinated me with him.
You've got a sort of technology-hating aviator.
You've got a writer who hates intellectuals.
You have an aristocrat who, in so many ways, tries to be a man of the people.
You've got all these wonderful little sort of crinkles in the life, crinkles in the life.
And so that got me, though.
And then finding out that it was just, you know those great
That Penofsky definition of human has two connotations.
It can mean, you know, two errors to human, and it can mean making mistakes and being weak.
And then human in the sense of, as opposed to the animal kingdom, human as in glorious and heroic and blah, blah, blah.
And it was a life that went in both of those directions at the same time.
So I just got really hooked on the whole contrast between the two worlds.
That was sort of the initial starting point.
It's 1989.
I'm at SNS at this point.
The first reaction is what every publisher would do.
I went to, you know, the first two biographers, like I think I thought it would be appropriate, and said, wouldn't you like to write a book about Sandex for me?
I will publish it.
Both of them said, this is me.
This is me speaking.
So I said, they said, fine, but call me in, you know, 2013 when I'm done with, you know, Collette, whoever they were doing at the time.
So this is a book you wanted as an editor.
Essentially, yeah.
But, yeah.
I mean, it's interesting because the whole transition from editing to writing a biography was extremely easy.
So anyway, the more I read, just basically to tempt the next person, the more I realized I'd always secretly wanted to write a book about France.
In many ways, Sandex's life, because it is always going at cross-current with France, was a cheap way to write about France.
I wouldn't say cheap.
But it was a sort of easy way to write about France.
So...
I took the plunge, my husband pushed me to take the plunge that your wife took you, pushed you to make, and quit my job and wrote a proposal and sold it.
And you sold it before you left the job?
I sold it after I left the job.
I didn't tell anybody what I was doing.
And I went off to Montreal, which is like the best collection of... Do you like some coffee?
Yes, coffee would be great, actually.
Some coffee?
I'll give you the section.
The first selection of French and English editions.
It's fabulous to start the book, because they think of... In France, Saint-Exup's reputation, as you can tell from the book, has just taken a plunge.
They don't have the French bias, they don't have the French sophistication toward literature.
So they still think of him as this god of French literature.
It was incredibly easy to do the research there.
He made only one visit to Montreal, but all the press for that visit was easily found and all the books were there.
So it was a kind of convenient place to be holed up, not telling anyone what I was doing and starting the book.
This is absolutely off the record, but the reason I did it was that I was afraid to say to my old authors, oh, I'm thinking of writing a book.
Quick way to end a friendship.
So they didn't tell me what I was doing until the proposal went out on submission.
So that's basically where it started.
When you did the proposal, how much work was it?
Enough to sustain the proposal?
I had already done about three months research, and I probably did about three more for the proposal.
I mean, of course, now if I look back at the proposal, so much of what I said is either facile or wrong.
You know, and so much of what gets you intrigued is not what... No bearing to the book.
The big stories of my book...
I had no idea how fascinating it was going to be.
One of the most interesting things for me writing the film and thinking about when I was thinking about writing was the context between the work and the actual literature.
Because so much of what's in the work is autobiographical, but
And more so than any other writer who actually writes about what happens to him in a thoroughly honest turn.
And so Danny talked about the crash and the delgating.
This is how it happened, and this is what came out of it, and this is what happened afterwards.
It was great fun.
And I had no idea going in that there was going to be that much correlation.
I had no idea how truthful he was being on the page.
That there would be that much correlation between the back story, so to speak, and his accounts of it.
And it would be that funny.
I had no idea how funny he was.
Which was definitely one of the things that...
kept me going.
I don't mind my jumping around.
Do you think he killed himself?
I think he didn't want to go on living, but that's different than killing yourself.
I think it's true that any one of those last missions could have been the last by the time he's ready for it to be the last.
But I think that's almost entirely... He knew he was flying a plane that he didn't know how to fly.
And he couldn't turn.
I mean, he couldn't... At that point, he didn't even have the physical strength to be kind of looking behind him, seeing if there was anyone following him, concentrating on all his controls and monitoring the oxygen supply.
So I don't think... I don't think he ever went up without thinking, as many of the pilots at that point did.
This could be my very last mission.
And that's why his life is so much in order for after the war.
The last letters, as much as they're filled with
You know, if I die, I'll regret nothing.
And, you know, if I die, keep doing this with my papers.
They're also filled with, I really want to finish my book.
I mean, there's a certain link to the future.
Not often, but there's an occasional glimmer of me thinking, everything that happens after the war will be ugly, but I expect to be there to experience it.
I don't think he killed himself.
I mean, he was definitely...
Not just of the war, but of the world.
And didn't have any... The fact that the war was ending was only half an end to his battles.
His battles were just beginning.
He could see the problems of technology, and he hated the modern world.
You mentioned that your husband was a pilot?
My husband was a pilot.
There was a big... What is his pilot?
Just a little place.
You've been very good here the last year.
Did you do that yet or not?
I'll try and do a little mask on.
He's also quite tall.
He's also, although he hate my saying it, occasionally absent-minded.
He's also a friend from the aristocratic family.
There are definitely certain parallels there, which helps in terms of
I think in terms of the fascination on my part.
These were things with which I was in some way involved to begin with.
And it was, you know, social living with someone who's fascinated by your work.
It would have been harder to have written a biography of, you know, Virginia Woolf and have had him that interested in what I was doing.
But I don't know how much it accounts to get written about it.
Was he as interested in...
No, no.
She still comes to that French bias that Sandex is a, you know, sort of second-rate writer, an adolescent association, not somebody in the canon, basically.
That was not all that well known.
But he was a great person, right?
Well, you know, the operative quote for me was that I've actually got one in the book about the friend who says, when the flying is dangerous, he's brilliant, and when the flying is boring, he's dangerous.
So did you kind of go in with a totally open mind?
How much did you know about it?
I knew the facts, basically.
No one had ever done most of the research outside the obvious channels.
So there were huge gaps.
You know, the love wave was thoroughly unexplored.
No one had ever looked in the American archives.
It spends all this time in America.
No one's ever looked in the American archives.
Both of the crashes of the 30s, which
which affect him so deeply, were completely undocumented.
There were a big few things I knew nothing about, because none of the early biographers had known anything about.
The earlier biographers were all of them hindered by either the fact that they were in France, or the fact that the wife was alive, the mistress was not only alive, but tormenting them, and these big margins of stuff were left there to be found.
Um, the American army officers fly with him at the end of his life.
No one had talked to him.
There's huge gaps.
I can't tell my opinion.
You were running out of time, too, actually, weren't you?
Yes, I was, I was rather, um, I must say, was my deadline, weren't you?
No, I mean in terms of getting angry with the people who were still alive.
Oh, I started with all the old people.
I mean, I know it's a sort of demo thing to say, but you just think if anyone dies in the afternoon or something.
Um, I have five people in my book over here.
Elliot Roosevelt was the only one who had the ill-grace.
One of them died at the age of 99.
They all died.
I worked mindfully after them.
They're not going to be around.
There was a definite sense, and this is true, the new subject too, which we'll talk about later, a definite sense that this is the last moment at which you could write the book and still have the eyewitnesses.
In this case, many of the women, because they were younger, and in many of the pilots, because they were younger, survived things.
And at the same time, get the people you and I mentioned earlier who are desperate to talk because they realize they've reached the end of their lives, and they're now ready to open up.
And they didn't talk to anyone earlier.
Fabulous.
Fabulous stuff.
And the one person, sorry, the one person who, yes, I'll give you a great example.
The one person who so much broke my heart was Sylvia Reinhardt, the mistress, the girlfriend who, at his home, he read The Little Prince.
died this summer.
Did you have this tear where she was the one person whose hands I've wanted to deliver the book?
I'm sorry, what did you want, like an example of people?
Yeah, exactly.
What was one of the really great surprises?
I mean, you can't believe what you're hearing.
A sort of trivial one, but fun for me.
Not entirely trivial.
He always sings.
And everyone, half the people would say, he sang, in French you say, comme un casserole, like a cow.
He sang really offbeat.
Do it slowly in the French.
And comme un casserole, like casserole.
And half the people would say he sang beautifully.
The French mistress, who considers herself the expert on him, he sang beautifully and no one ever appreciated it.
So, you know, I never really thought about this.
And then one day, one day I found out there was a letter, two letters,
From St.
X, two women named Hedda Stern in Washington.
And I thought, well, that's lovely.
I've never heard of Hedda Stern.
I'll, you know, find those in due course.
And, you know, three years went by.
I got to Paris.
I got to Burgo.
I got everywhere, but I never got to Washington.
I went to this and found out all these letters.
There are these amazingly intimate letters about how depressed she was and how she saved her life.
Beautiful, beautiful letters.
I'd write you more often, but I hate myself.
I'm so depressed.
You saved my life last night.
Who is this woman?
I went home.
Did you copy the letters?
I let me copy the letters.
Beautifully read Little Prince's.
You know, I could tell when they were from.
He never dated his male.
But you could tell by the drawings often when they were written.
So these were clearly post Little Prince, post having written a Little Prince.
So it took late 42, early 43.
I went home, three three nights coming to sleep.
Who is this woman?
How come I've never heard of her?
How come I left this till the last minute?
And then I said, and you're like, just because you give your archives to this Smithsonian does not mean that you are dead.
She turns out to live about five blocks from here in New York.
She's Mr. Saul Steinberg, the artist.
Wow.
And no one had ever come to her before and said, what about... There was a fairly well-researched book in 1970, but since I know they had ever come to her.
Yeah, it's been a while.
Anyway...
Well, was she ready to tag?
I mean, this man, she'd come to America.
They'd been introduced to her art.
She's a fairly young woman, I would think.
She was in her 20s and the 40s.
Sure.
Anyway, someone introduces her to Santa.
They make a tremendous impression on each other.
They're just strange.
But her memories of her, she's an artist.
fabulous, fabulous mind, and a perfectly vivid memory.
And the impressions that this man made upon her, heartbroken, lost in New York, in the middle of writing Citadel, which is the book you lose time.
And she was a kid, but a brilliant, incredibly cultured kid.
And she just, you know, she saw everything.
So she had this just flowing, flowing, flowing, fabulous description of him.
It's amazing that she had
to give this tape to the Smithsonian.
Before her death, yes.
You love people like that.
Anyway, the one thing she hadn't given to the Smithsonian was a tape of him singing.
Uh-huh.
So there we have it, there's four years after I started the project, someone finally says to me, oh, and I have this tape, I don't remember what's on it.
You know, that feeling you get when someone says it to you, and you're just rushing home on a cold sweat.
And he's sitting around in tears hearing him sing.
He sings this wonderful old Quebec country tune, you know, voilà le Beauvoir, just, you know, it's exciting.
So that kind of thing.
I mean, you know, it's like you just have that chivalry.
How long were you an editor?
I started in 82, and I left in 89.
Just tell me a little bit about your background.
I started at Viking Penguin, basically.
You're from Massachusetts.
I'm from the Berkshire.
Are you actually going up to North Adams?
I'm actually not going up.
My poor newlywed mother, for whom I had come, I called her and said, Mom, she's very funny that I'm not coming with you.
It started at HarperCollins for a year, Harper and Ralph.
Um, then went to Viking for about four or five years, then went to Viking for about four or five years.
Yes, I had it wrong after a bad gossip she got.
Um, we went to some of them just after that, and then let's move.
My degree was in Art History and Philosophy.
I had no idea.
I mean,
And when did you graduate?
82.
82, yeah.
I had always had summer jobs in publishing.
You know, you have that attraction to books and you just can't quite take it.
And I just by accident found what seemed to be an extremely good job in publishing before I graduated.
So I took it thinking this will save me the trouble of having to think about what I do next.
And you know, you get instantly hooked if you haven't already been hooked.
So, no.
This came to me when I was thinking about the next book.
The first time it's like, I think, I've only been read it once, The First Marriage, where you just throw yourself into it.
You think, I can do this.
The second time, you know what the pitfalls are like, you know about those sleepless nights, you know about the setbacks.
They just think, why would anyone want to do this again?
It's much harder, I think, except at one time.
I love it.
I can't imagine doing anything else.
He had a wonderful quote from David McCullough, who was one of my great favorites, and he wanted to see my book.
He had gone on for a few years.
But I remember the last time I met him, he said, now you've got to do a biography.
It's incredibly addictive, and I have to be careful.
I said, yeah, well, who?
Who do you write about?
He said, well, you've got to do this.
He said, now you've done this book.
He said, now you've got to be a biographer.
I'll think of someone for you.
I'm an expert at thinking of subjects for other people.
The problem with it is that you, and this is very similar to being an editor in some ways, you very much displace your own existence.
You become very absent.
You start dating your Czechs, 1944.
And there's a good reason for it.
I mean, you start living in someone else's clothes, you start living in someone else's costume.
Every time you put your clothes on, you think, I would have made it.
It's very disturbing.
You know, one thing about women, and I can't think of the name of it.
I'm not going to mention it in this piece, but... Well, let's mention it.
I'm not going to mention it.
You know, let's agree.
That's important to me.
I mean, I think when you read biography, part of it is, you know, a sense of voyeurism about someone else, you know, about what it's like to be someone else, but part of it is because you want to read history, and an easy way to swallow history is
in fact, to read about someone else's life.
So all the early aviation stuff, and France in the 30s, and the whole colonial empire, I thought was tremendously important.
And I've been getting these lovely letters from French diplomats saying, you've recreated my childhood.
So I've decided, yeah, I've decided I didn't necessarily botch it.
But very nice letters about, I felt, I could feel like I was 16 years old again, walking through the Luxembourg on my way to class.
Now, did you know what you love, technically your love?
My husband read a bit.
There's an extremely gifted aviation story.
I think I abused him.
He's always thought I was amused.
I definitely amused him.
He thought of it as a pleasure.
I'm happy to say I didn't make very many mistakes, but the mistakes I did make, he caught.
And most of them were not aviation mistakes.
They were very funny things like, you know, misspelling Argentine or something like that.
But he did a fabulous job.
It's crazy if somebody points those things out to you.
That's Kate Scott.
You have to give me her... The new Mozart book, the biography that's coming out from HarperCollins.
I noticed that he credits her in there.
Oh, really?
Oh, then we have to have her.
Okay.
She's...
I mean, I could go on and on and on with the embarrassment that you love.
Every time someone catches something, you just think, public... I'm curious if I'd rather talk about anything.
You don't have to worry with me, because I did a Margaret Atwood piece this week, and I did a little nothing hookup for it.
I feel that a little book of hundreds of people created a little thing that they're bad opening up to is really
I haven't read it, though.
Have you read it?
You have, must have.
But, you know, I did a nice personality piece and really didn't get a stage in my own research.
I mean, you know, the problem with biography, if you do one, and I'm sure it's problem with your book, too, is that you do all this research that never, I mean, the stuff just ends up in the cutting room floor over and over and over again.
It's not 50 times as much.
I've got a house filled with material, I feel like that.
Do you have this sense of, I'm amazed at how expensive you are.
I mean, you were in panic when you finally had a contract and then you actually had the right to support it.
Yeah, I thought I was best under pressure as a janitor.
So the contract didn't scare me.
There were panic attacks.
But the enormity of the budget.
No.
This time I will feel that because I'm smarter now, I already have.
There were times where I laugh and I thought to myself, thank God he only loves to be 44.
I definitely had that.
Next time I'm going to write about River Seen.
But no, the one thing that struck panic into my heart, I've been finishing on time or remotely on time, because this is the 60s I've ever seen.
Because of the 50th anniversary, the French had to have it out earlier in the year.
Whereas the French mistress was a real problem.
I mean, she definitely knew him better than 90% of the people with whom I spoke.
And her policy, we played a little cat and mouse game with each other.
I would go to see her every two days when I was in Paris.
I probably interviewed her 50 or 60 times.
And there was flabulation every time.
Or just maybe I would see her once or twice a week.
over the course of the three or four months stays I would do in Paris.
And the conversations would always begin with some incredible insulting held in my direction, which was expected essentially to silence me for the next 45 minutes.
So she would establish the agenda then?
In a way, in a way.
And occasionally she would ramble onto something that resembled the territory on which I had questions.
more often than not.
I mean, it was a very, very difficult relationship, and I had no idea ever how it would resolve itself.
Did she insist on identity?
She insisted, but I never mentioned her name.
Big difference, yeah.
But I never mentioned her name in France.
The initial deal was that she would either speak to me, she would only speak to me if I would not use her name, and if I would show her the passages in which her presence appears, when she appears.
I had no problem with that either.
I mean, if it's pertinent and you want to get it right, I would read things to people and get, you know.
My feeling was, well, she could have said at that point, I don't want this, then I might have had a problem.
The real split choice there was, was I going to be taken to task for not mentioning her name?
Her name doesn't mean anything.
Her name is sort of the equivalent in America of DuPont or something.
DuPont, actually.
Why did the critic give you a high ten?
I mean, I don't know.
I don't know.
No, it didn't.
Her name is published now in France, and actually there was an international held trivia writing on me which says, she is commonly known to be a much-mentioned film, so I thought I had got my revenge and I hadn't had to write it, but that's traumatic into my heart.
It was very important to me always to keep a line of communication open with her.
It's only because I thought she could correct me.
I mean, she knew things, other people would say things, and she suddenly couldn't have gone to London in 36, and I was sleeping with him through the winter, he was seeing Paris or whatever, but... Was she supportive?
No, never.
Never supported it.
In many words, I had a lot of... Why did she help?
She wrote a book about him after he died, and it became, under a different name, of course, and that became this sort of urtext about Chevrolet.
It's in the book that she wrote it.
Of course, everyone always politely refers to that book in France as, you know, by Pierre Chevrier, but it's really immense.
No other woman had written about him, and I think it confused her that he had this young American Jewish woman coming to her wanting to write about him, and she couldn't quite figure out what to do with me, and I think she was a little worried.
She was worried that if she didn't talk to me, I could inflict more damage than if she did talk to me.
So I think that's basically why she talked.
But it was always a very sort of debilitating thing to have to deal with.
Yes, especially because a lot of the people who had major records I needed to see were French Air Force generals.
And they're, you know, what does this woman want?
No, not at all, but just, you know, clearly she's not serious.
There's a certain amount of sexism in France, and there's a definite amount of anti-Semitism in France.
Just sheer confusion.
She couldn't possibly be serious.
She must be here on a different pretense.
with enough assistance or whatever you want to call it, I ultimately got the files I needed.
But it would take three or four tries, or it would take, you know, it always does in a country like France.
But particularly when you're dealing with, you know, when you're a woman dealing with the military and asking about something, someone, like Sandex, who has become a sort of national myth, definitely.
All right, let's ask another question.
And I'm not asking you to tell me
The gender issue never occurred to me, frankly.
Only, and I don't think it did occur to me, until
two things happened until I started trying to talk to the military people and realizing that it was requiring either a very short, short, an enormous amount of charm to get just a home on it.
And I thought there was another book being written and had the very same experience that you had of someone else's.
Everyone has someone like that in danger of her life.
And realized it was a savage attack on something.
And I did realize that I think it was never published in America, thank God.
I had a certain more patience with him.
What's the basis of the attack?
He was a spoiled brat kind of thing.
I think I had more patience with that as a woman.
There were 150,000, I couldn't believe the numbers, of the annual sales.
The small figures are wings out of stars and flight to ours are unbelievable.
Anyway, you do have a man who's strolling around New York, and it varies because he can't spell.
The English in there are his books in Bloomingville's windows, and maybe there are cartoons about him in the newspaper.
He's a complete celebrity.
I did a little crazy.
Yes, bizarre.
Good for you.
I said, that's a good catch.
I mean, she doesn't just have the motor.
It's good for you.
Yeah, she's right there in the bindings.
You know, it's too hard for noticing that little tink on the back.
Yeah.
You ought to have to get permission for that.
I mean, that's a big deal.
Yeah, because they're in the skater, I'm just saying.
They were extremely... I'll tell you later.
Yeah.
In fact, that may actually be editions.
In other words, there may be three English language editions, but it's a lot of books.
So many people just really only know him from that book, but there is quite a body of work.
It's more than a one-shot.
So that was one of the sort of initial intriguing things, was this whole, he's not, there is a lot of him in that book, but that book is hardly representative of the life or the work.
And it's not, you know, it's the best book, it's the best known book, but the most sort of lyrical passages, you know, the real diehard fan is the person who's going to pick up one town in stars or flight to ice, and say these are the supreme accounts of flight, basically, one of the most poetic things that have been written about having the wind go through your hair while you're in the open cockpit.
Yeah.
It's that funny sense of... My older daughter, I mean, I have it.
Reading that.
The Little Prince.
No, the other one.
The Little Prince, Dad.
Yeah, I mean, it's a beautiful book.
But, I mean, The Little Prince is funny because if you look back at the other books with The Little Prince in mind, and, of course, when we read the other books, we've hardly thought about, you know, we're 13 years old and we've hardly thought about The Little Prince.
You see all the images of the little prints.
They're there just to be plucked off the trays in the early books.
It's all there from the first days in the desert, really.
Would there be a biography without a little fence?
Do you think there'd be enough of a residence?
Good question.
I think his reputation has... It's a little bit like asking, you know, would we still care about J.M.
Barrie if there weren't Peter Pan?
No, probably not as much.
I mean, it certainly would have made him a cult figure.
Yeah.
I mean, there's exactly, there are these enormous, you know, there's all the Barrie plays, you know, all that stuff, but...
But the one thing that has made him rise above the path or, you know, the real thing is when those pictures people say it's changed my life, you know, it's given me a philosophy, it's racing to a very different level.
You know, I don't think the appeal would, it would clearly be a great biography, but no one would care.
You know, this being your first, your book, your first biography, did the guy ask you, well, was there this, this medical kind of a process where this guy doesn't come alive for you, I mean, where you want to teach you?
Oh, yes.
You know him.
You mentioned you writing checks out and dating him in 1944.
There were curious moments like that.
You know, some of it, I wrote about this in an essay, which the Washington Post was doing, but at one point someone gave me some document they had lying around, which was his, and I realized I had written it on the back.
It was a very beautiful, very little prince-like, very lovely little prince.
to a friend.
And the friend kept a little weeping willow tree on his roof terrace in New York.
And it was all about how he nurtured this tree against the smog of whatever it was called there in the pollution of New York City.
And he doted on it and he chased the birds away.
It's very much like the little prince in his roses.
And the whole thing had been written on the back of a dry cleaner cardboard from New York.
And it just pushed the whole thing that much closer.
It made it that much more personal.
I'm sure when you'd be in the room with one of the women with whom he was particularly intimate, there'd be the sense of, you know, the great pain or magic dust, sort of.
You mentioned in the proposal that you love proposing to get over work, certainly you had an idea of what you wanted to accomplish, but you also, you must have ignored.
Absolutely no idea.
It's faster than a lot of people are able to do it.
I work day and night, it's true.
I didn't have any other job.
A tremendous amount of child care, let us not forget the nanny.
It makes it extremely
General's husband has let me write on weekends.
I mean, this is key.
I researched like crazy.
I probably over-researched at times.
I felt I couldn't.
I mean, I felt I wouldn't be able to say something if I didn't know the 10 things that I didn't... I'm still researching my book, and it's already published.
I'm still researching my book, and it's already published.
But don't you find that there are things that, gee, I wish I had that.
So that's why I said to those 24 years or whatever of his life, it says to you, I mean, there's still, who's the person?
Oh, Sylvie Weiner, whom I mentioned, died, left her papers to her son, who happens to teach at William Salt Lake,
She showed me all her papers, I'm quite sure, but she always was very disorganized, and she was always moving house, and some papers would be here, and some would be there, and there's that off chance I missed something, and I want to see what she gave me, and just because I wonder if I missed something.
Totally not, and it's funny because it's all sort of, you know, the search for the new subject,
It's very much like replacing someone who's been living in your house with a new house desk.
I have one, and it's been like chewing Sandex and his cigarette smoke out of the house.
And then when you said, did you know what you were getting into, I had no idea what it would be like to live with him.
I mean, there are times I just want to shake him by the shoulders and say, how can you become stupid?
And then there are times where you're just enamored with... A number of people fight.
When you ask them about picking the subject,
But I'm certain they have to be that they want to do it.
Love affair.
Exactly.
I can't tell you, how many people have told me the way Tommy talks about these big biographies about tipping this subject or David McCullough.
He's given up in mid-stream.
That's why he's not reading?
Oh, yeah.
He's doing, he's doing, he's a chaplain now.
Oh, is he really?
He was doing, he was doing Picasso.
He was doing Picasso.
No, until he decided he accepted it.
I didn't know that.
And so he gave it up.
And Joe, Justin Sapp was the same thing.
He was doing grants.
Until McFeely came out.
And that was a program.
That doesn't help.
But McCullough also was, remember when the Teddy Roosevelt book did come out?
Impressive.
People still went ahead and did morning's horseback.
But people will say, and they'll use a different expression.
Well, you know, it's like kicking them all over a lot.
You know, you're going to be sweeping up this person.
You're going to be doing those sports that you don't even like in the first place.
I mean, things I wouldn't do for my husband.
Absolutely.
So you really, now tell me about the next step.
Perhaps for some of those reasons.
The music sort of appeared on the horizon, then I threw, you know, a woman that buys the first pair of shoes she tries on kind of reasonably, I threw like 20 other names up in the air and tried to pretend she was there, because I think I was afraid of inviting the first person to the house.
It's the wife of Vladimir Nabokov, Baron Nabokov, to whom he dedicates every book, whom he's married.
He's been married for 52 years, she's through it, she's not, you know what I mean, and it's a really wonderful, I mean, it's a truly marvelous, happy marriage.
And yet, he's a very, as we know.
Yeah, yeah.
And I still realize that, you know, it's time I stopped writing about French Catholics, you know, aristocrats here, right?
Because I've read about something a little closer to home.
And, you know, it's this whole sort of lost world thing, which
on some level I really related to which I didn't realize until I was writing about that in his case you've got the whole sort of chateau life which fairly existed in the 20th century but he was born into it and sort of woke up one day and realized there's no room in the world for an aristocrat in the 20th century and kind of everything disappears out from under him as he gets older you know the early airplanes suddenly airplanes are these sophisticated things he doesn't even know how to fly and the airline goes under and then France goes under and it's like world after world and
In her case, she had the same thing.
You know, she has to leave Russia, and she goes to Berlin, and as you do, they have to leave Berlin, and then they shuffle into France, and of course France falls, and they shuffle off to the U.S., and you think it's the same process of sort of the world folding up behind them in some way.
I love his lectures, and the lectures are better at all.
I have a lot of pleasure.
It's so great.
Yeah, wonderful.
When did she die, or did she shuffle out?
She died in 91.
Have you made contact with the family?
Yes, I know.
Are they supportive of something?
Yes, I think so.
I mean, you never know.
Be careful what you say poorly if you would.
You never know.
I wouldn't even get into it.
I'm just curious.
Yes, they love the idea.
I don't think, in all fairness, I don't think she would have loved the idea.
It was an extremely private person.
Totally.
But how a woman of that genius could have been... But she had to determine that she was a woman of genius.
You can tell by what she's written about her and by things that have been said by other people.
Edmund White has said that
on one of the early meetings with her, she recited back to him two pages from the first novel.
She'd photograph his memory, seemingly photograph his memory for prose.
She was the only editor her husband had, or she edited his book.
She would lay a tie in to check his translation.
I must have known that, but I'd forgotten it.
You know, you have an interesting parallel with that.
that you use in your book here is M. R. Lindbergh in a way to express how fresh she did have her own life.
No, but that's a very similar, and always stood behind Charles even when she disagreed with him.
It makes clear that their politics don't drive, and yet she stands by her husband, as you would in those days.
That was one of the most
things for me to write, because I talked to her about meeting Sandex, and I had the diaries.
But you use it in the brain.
You can't think you can get a pinch size.
Yeah, that wasn't great.
He made this impression on people that was so, especially in his 30s and 40s, when they just, no one ever forgot him, people would say, you know, charisma plus, when you walk into the room, the temperature changes.
So that comment seemed particularly justified to me, that her son would say, oh, he's a saint.
Yes, exactly, no, and
One of the British reviewers who really liked the book said it was like he had a hula hoop around, like a saint has around him.
Talking about, you know, things, how the research continues, I wouldn't be a bit surprised if you still a lot of really valuable things from people who are going to read the book.
About his life.
Yeah, things will start, people will learn.
Well, the nice thing about the piece of the New York Times was that, I mean, you probably found this as well.
That actually extended the research by a year.
Actually, yeah.
I actually had to make a trip to California.
Because of that piece, right?
Because of stuff that was totally denied to me the first time around.
But you became somebody, right?
All of a sudden, now Bill Martin at the Huntington Library says, I'll get you, what do you do?
Right.
It's better than anything, but it's the first time in the Huntington Library's history that they've had a private collection of exhibitions.
It's just close.
200,000 people came here.
Her stuff is as good as the Huntington's and the Illinois State.
There isn't a go.
If you're married, this is a second, third, I think.
Yeah, you don't have to know that.
Oh, well, I've got a time speaking.
Also, did you run an office query in the Times?
The all this query from the Times was fascinating for me because I got 140 pieces of mail.
Some of them, you know, absurd.
Have you ever raised me in seven stars?
Some of them are unsolievable numbers.
And when I first started, it must have been 1990s.
But then the Times did the most wonderful thing.
They could have done the accident and they ran it again three months later.
Another 60 pieces of a man.
And among those, the first time around, was Sylvia Reinhardt, whom I'd been looking for in Austria.
She was living in L.A.
I mean, just fabulous, fabulous things.
I think that's not how I found Jean Renoir's son, which is how I got the wonderful Renoir stuff, but just people who'd met him once, people who might subject quickly often have a better...
because they don't know anything.
Often they don't even know.
They have no idea the extent of the strain, but they have these fabulous anecdotes filled in an extremely precise way.
I want to send you some clothes, sorry.
Do you want to see your clothes?
Absolutely, I want to see your clothes.
I want your copy of tradition dress and I want your New York Times piece because I missed it because my daughter was born.
Do you want to see your clothes?
Do you want to see my killer press kit?
Yes.
Do you want to see my British reviews?
This is what they say, model biography, flawlessly written.
I don't have a card.
I'm all right.
I'll take your pedicle.
I think I heard this story from someone who had your name, which I think is unusual, isn't it, Pastor?
What can you tell me now?
What can I tell you?
If I have any questions, I'll give you a call.
I'll do this pretty quickly.
Thank you.
That would redeem me after the time's run.
I often find that the conversation will go off on a tangent.
To me, it would happen to fly, and somebody would just throw something out.
You don't realize stuff about your character until later as well.
And the little things someone just tossed off that you may not have written down in your notebook, if they were on tape, later struck you a different way.
In a way, you ended up listening and re-listening to the tapes.
One thing I find about the tapes is that I do tend to be lazy during the album.
Right.
Because you know it's all on tape.
You'll listen to it later.
Right.
Hold on, turn it off.
You have to pay attention to me now.
Okay.
How many interviews?
Would you say you did?
Yeah.
I don't know.
Hundreds?
No.
Oh, for the people for the book?
150.
That's including multiple interviews sometimes.
Did you have any reviews from anyone?
I got reviews from the people whom I thought might cause problems.
That's usually a kind of feeling.
I didn't get any reviews.
It's up to the lawyers or the publishers.
I only got releases after the fact, and the legal department looked at it and said, so is our insurance all could get you a problem.
Joe McGinnis told me, he said, the only time you ever, I like, did you know Joe?
I didn't know, he wasn't there when I was there.
He was a friend of mine.